"Then ultimate taking refuge, this is what it is here. This is according to Dzogchen level.
This is what the statement used here. It's ultimate state with taking refuge. And this is all our,
at the Buddha Dharma Sanghasa, no other than our own, this present awareness. Our present awareness
,
our present, our mind, the nature of the mind is embodiment of Buddha Dharma and Sangha. It is
source of everything. Everything comes from there, from this our awareness. And this is what it's
called,
called the fundamental ground. One's own awareness is the father who generated the Buddha.
This is our ultimate foundation of ground, our ultimate nature of the mind.
It is the openness or it is emptiness aspect of the nature of the mind is the Buddha. This is
emptiness. And this unceasing clarity, even though it is open and emptiness, but it's not negation
or
the black hole status, it is arising unceasing energy, energy of the clarity, clarity. That
energy is then the Dharma. That arising energy of the awareness, this intelligence that just to
begin
this, just at the drone of that, drone of the, drone of the beginning of the energy of the
awareness
is the Dharma. That is Dharma. And then union of that emptiness and arising energy, that is Sangha.
That is Sangha. So this is when you look to your mind or to our mind.
Moment you look to your mind, what we find is open. It's empty. There's nothing that we can explain
.
That is the Dharma. So that is Buddha. Even he didn't find anything, there is all this intelligence
arising. When you look to that nature of the intelligence or that energy, it is again that
moment is empty. This arising energy is the Dharma. Then it is all the intelligence kind of figure
out
all these things coming up, one minute this coming. This is, is Sangha. So this is ultimate, the
absolute Buddha Dharma Sangha. This is in the Dokti teaching said, what? You heard this. It's
called
Moo, Ravi, and Tuggi. Moo, Tunga. Nature not, the awareness, nature of the awareness is natural,
is empty. Empty, that which is open in the Dokti teaching. So that's the Dharma. The awareness,
emptiness is Dharma. And the unceasing energy, clarity, that energy, clarity aspect of the
awareness is sampokai. That is Dharma. Then unceasing emanation of this all consumption,
what we have, all different consulsions is namakaya. That is a Sangha, Sangha.
And even though there's all the aspects that we can see, but where they are,
what those are, where this you can find, there's nothing substantial solid that we can pinpoint
anything, anything. That is known as the natural, where things are. So therefore, this, this
nature of our mind is absolute Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, or the absolute state of
dharmakaya, sampokaya, namakaya, that all is right in here, right in here. And that energy,
that call it, then we can name it as, as like in the channel level, channel, or in the essence
level,
that is the blissfulness. That is good blissfulness. Therefore, in the Vediana teaching
open said, the entire universe is a mandala of the blissfulness of the emptiness, not just
in the Vediana teaching, making kind of like wake, wake or the false claims. Once we discovered our
nature of that blissfulness or that nature, nature, everything is that because what we see,
what we hear, what we think is our mind or your mind. What do you think? What do you see? What do
you hear? What do you feel? Nobody can deny that is their mind or that their feelings.
That's what, how the mind controls and overpowers, every, our perception,
consumption, our destination, our environment. And stand and understand, discover this nature,
natural. Then we are known as masters of the natural, natural. So here, therefore, again,
with this understand here, already in this teaching, so some of the group members, somebody,
I take refuge in the nature. This, this is also three jewel, Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, external level
,
and the inner level, there are guru, Deva and Dakini, take refuge, three jewel and three roots.
And I said here, I said, so that is briefly meaning of this refuge, refuge place. Again,
this ultimate bliss here, we say this is the ultimate technique of refuge or kind of the more
ultimate technique of refuge, I call it jokti levels, level that our, our mind, our nature of
the mind is embodiment, Buddha, Dharma, Sangha. And therefore then I, with this understanding,
I make strong connection with that. I keep that knowledge up with, with trusty, with confidence,
with joy, trigger that I find today or trigger that I discovered by teaching with the Buddha.
I'm going to cherish and I'm going to uphold that. With that, with that determination, with that
commitment, with joy, that is known as then, the taking graphics.